---
layout: page-sidenav
group: "Introduction to Optimization"
title: "3. Convex Functions"
---


Outline
-------

- Definition of the convex function
- Examples
- Convex function operation
- Quasi-convexity

Convex Functions
----------------

**Convex function**

- **Defintion:** A function $$f:\mathbf{R^n}\to \mathbf{R}$$ is convex if the domain $$f\text{,dom}(f)$$ is a convex set, and if for any $$\theta \in [0,1]$$,

$$f(\theta x+(1-\theta)y)\le\theta f(x)+(1-\theta)f(y), \forall x,y \in \text{dom}(f)$$

- A function is strictly convex if the inequality is replaced by the strict equality with $$\theta \in (0,1)$$
- A function is concave if -f is convex
- **Convex function is defined on the convex set**
- The definition can be extended to

$$f(\sum_{j=1}^{k}\alpha_jx_j) \le \sum_{j=1}^{k}\alpha_jf(x_j)$$

for all $$\alpha_j \ge 0$$ and $$\sum_{j=1}^{k}a_j=1$$

- **Theorem:** A function $$f$$ is convex if and only if $$f$$ is convex when it is restricted to any line that intersects its domain. That is, $$f$$ is convex if and only if for any $$x\in \text{dom}(f)$$, and $$v,g(t)=f(x+tv)$$ is convex
	- 이 Theorem을 이용하면 $$\mathbf{R^n}$$ domain 에서가 아니라 $$\mathbf{R}$$ domain 에서 convex analysis 가능.
- **Proof($$\Rightarrow$$):**

Suppose that $$f$$ is convex. Then we need to show that $$g$$ is convex. Consider,

$$g(\alpha t_1 +(1-\alpha)t_2)\\=f(x+(\alpha t_1+(1-\alpha)t_2)v)\\=f(\alpha x+(1-\alpha)x+(\alpha t_1+(1-\alpha)t_2)v)
\\=f(\alpha(x+t_1v)+(1-\alpha)(x+t_2v))\\ \le \alpha f(x+t_1v)+(1-\alpha)f(x+t_2v)\\=\alpha g(t_1)+(1-\alpha)g(t_2)$$

- **Proof($$\Leftarrow$$):**

Let $$v=(y-x)$$. Then

$$g(t) = f(x+t(y-x)),g(t-1)=f(x+(t-1)(y-x))$$

Since $$g$$ is convex for any $$t$$, for any $$\alpha \in [0,1]$$

$$g((1-\alpha)t+\alpha (t-1)) \le \alpha g(t-1)+(1-\alpha)g(t)$$

Let $$t=1$$. Then

$$g(1-\alpha) \le \alpha g(0)+(1-\alpha)g(1)
\\ \Leftrightarrow f(\alpha x+(1-\alpha)x+(1-\alpha)(y-x)\le \alpha f(x)+(1-\alpha)f(y)
\\ \Leftrightarrow f(\alpha x+(1-\alpha)y) \le \alpha f(x)+(1-\alpha)f(y)$$

First order condition for convexity
-----------------------------------

- Suppose that $$f$$ is differentiable. Then $$f:S\to \mathbf{R}$$ is convex if and only if $$S$$ is convex and

$$f(y) \ge f(x) + \nabla f(x)^T(y-x), \forall x,y \in S$$

- Connection with the first order necessary condition. If $$x^*$$ is optimal, then

$$\nabla f(x^*) = 0, f(y) \ge f(x^*), \forall y \in S$$

- $$x^*$$ is a global minimum point.
- **Proof($$\Rightarrow$$):**

We will prove the one-dimensional case.
Assume that $$f$$ is convex. Then we have

$$f(x+t(y-x)) \le (1-t)f(x)+tf(y)
\\ \Leftrightarrow f(y) \ge f(x)+\frac{f(x+t(y-x))-f(x)}{t}$$

and by taking the limit $$t \to 0$$, we have the desired result

- **Proof($$\Leftarrow$$):**

Suppose now that we have the first order condition. Let $$z=\theta x+(1-\theta)y$$. Then

$$f(x) \ge f(z)+\nabla f(z)(x-z)$$

$$f(y) \ge f(z)+\nabla f(z)(y-z)$$

Then

$$\theta f(x)+(1-\theta)f(y) \ge f(z) = f(\theta x+(1-\theta)y$$

Second order condition for convexity
------------------------------------

준비중..